website/content/docs/advanced/index.md, before:

---
title: Advanced Topics
description: Advanced DomTrip concepts and techniques for power users
layout: page
---

# Advanced Topics

This section covers advanced DomTrip concepts and techniques for developers who want to leverage the full power of the library. These topics assume familiarity with the basic DomTrip concepts and APIs.

## Advanced API Patterns

### [Builder Patterns](builder-patterns/)
Learn about DomTrip's fluent builder APIs for creating and modifying XML documents.

- **Fluent interfaces** for document construction
- **Method chaining** patterns
- **Type-safe builders** for elements and attributes
- **Nested builder** hierarchies

### [Factory Methods](factory-methods/)
Explore the factory method patterns used throughout DomTrip for object creation.

- **Document factories** for different input sources
- **Element creation** patterns
- **Attribute builders** and factories
- **Configuration objects** and builders

## Performance and Optimization

### Memory Management
Best practices for efficient memory usage when processing large XML documents.

- **Streaming techniques** for large files
- **Memory-efficient** parsing strategies
- **Resource cleanup** patterns
- **Performance monitoring** tips

### Processing Strategies
Advanced techniques for different XML processing scenarios.

- **Batch processing** patterns
- **Incremental updates** strategies
- **Concurrent processing** considerations
- **Error handling** best practices

## Integration Patterns

### Framework Integration
How to integrate DomTrip with popular Java frameworks and libraries.

- **Spring Framework** integration
- **Jakarta EE** compatibility
- **Build tool** integration (Maven, Gradle)
- **Testing frameworks** support

### Custom Extensions
Extending DomTrip for specialized use cases.

- **Custom node types** implementation
- **Serialization customization**
- **Parser extensions**
- **Validation integration**

## Configuration and Customization

### Advanced Configuration
Deep dive into DomTrip's configuration options and customization capabilities.

- **Parser configuration** options
- **Serialization settings** customization
- **Whitespace handling** strategies
- **Error handling** configuration

### Plugin Architecture
Understanding DomTrip's extensible architecture.

- **Plugin interfaces** and implementations
- **Custom processors** development
- **Extension points** utilization
- **Third-party integrations**

## Best Practices

### Code Organization
Recommended patterns for organizing DomTrip-based code.

- **Service layer** patterns
- **Repository patterns** for XML data
- **Factory abstractions**
- **Testing strategies**

### Error Handling
Advanced error handling and recovery strategies.

- **Exception hierarchies** understanding
- **Recovery patterns** implementation
- **Validation strategies**
- **Debugging techniques**

## Migration and Compatibility

### Migration Strategies
Guidelines for migrating from other XML libraries to DomTrip.

- **From DOM4J** migration patterns
- **From JDOM** transition strategies
- **Legacy code** adaptation
- **Performance comparisons**

### Version Compatibility
Managing DomTrip versions and compatibility considerations.

- **API evolution** understanding
- **Backward compatibility** strategies
- **Upgrade paths** planning
- **Deprecation handling**

## Getting Started with Advanced Topics

These advanced topics build upon the foundational concepts covered in:

- **[Getting Started Guide](../getting-started/)** - Basic concepts and usage
- **[Features Overview](../features/)** - Core feature descriptions
- **[API Reference](../api/)** - Complete API documentation

Each advanced topic includes detailed explanations, code examples, and real-world use cases to help you master DomTrip's more sophisticated capabilities.

Commit message:

docs: reorganize documentation structure (#25)
- Remove standalone installation.md file
- Move comparison.md and migration.md to advanced/ directory
- Update menu.yml to reflect new structure:
  - Remove standalone Installation menu item
  - Add Library Comparison and Migration Guide under Advanced Topics
- Update advanced/index.md to include new sections
- Update docs/index.md to sync with menu structure
- Fix all internal links to reflect new paths

This creates a cleaner hierarchical structure where advanced topics
are properly grouped together, and all index pages accurately reflect
their directory contents.

website/content/docs/advanced/index.md, after:

---
title: Advanced Topics
description: Advanced DomTrip concepts and techniques for power users
layout: page
---

# Advanced Topics

This section covers advanced DomTrip concepts and techniques for developers who want to leverage the full power of the library. These topics assume familiarity with the basic DomTrip concepts and APIs.

## Advanced API Patterns

### [Builder Patterns](builder-patterns/)
Learn about DomTrip's fluent builder APIs for creating and modifying XML documents.

- **Fluent interfaces** for document construction
- **Method chaining** patterns
- **Type-safe builders** for elements and attributes
- **Nested builder** hierarchies

### [Factory Methods](factory-methods/)
Explore the factory method patterns used throughout DomTrip for object creation.

- **Document factories** for different input sources
- **Element creation** patterns
- **Attribute builders** and factories
- **Configuration objects** and builders

## Migration and Comparison

### [Library Comparison](comparison/)
Comprehensive comparison of DomTrip with other popular XML libraries.

- **Feature comparison** matrix with DOM4J, JDOM, Java DOM, and Jackson XML
- **Performance benchmarks** and memory usage analysis
- **Use case recommendations** for choosing the right library
- **Detailed advantages** and trade-offs for each library

### [Migration Guide](migration/)
Step-by-step guide for migrating from other XML libraries to DomTrip.

- **Migration patterns** from DOM4J, JDOM, Java DOM, and Jackson XML
- **Side-by-side examples** showing equivalent operations
- **Common migration challenges** and solutions
- **Gradual migration strategies** for large codebases

## Performance and Optimization

### Memory Management
Best practices for efficient memory usage when processing large XML documents.

- **Streaming techniques** for large files
- **Memory-efficient** parsing strategies
- **Resource cleanup** patterns
- **Performance monitoring** tips

### Processing Strategies
Advanced techniques for different XML processing scenarios.

- **Batch processing** patterns
- **Incremental updates** strategies
- **Concurrent processing** considerations
- **Error handling** best practices

## Integration Patterns

### Framework Integration
How to integrate DomTrip with popular Java frameworks and libraries.

- **Spring Framework** integration
- **Jakarta EE** compatibility
- **Build tool** integration (Maven, Gradle)
- **Testing frameworks** support

### Custom Extensions
Extending DomTrip for specialized use cases.

- **Custom node types** implementation
- **Serialization customization**
- **Parser extensions**
- **Validation integration**

## Configuration and Customization

### Advanced Configuration
Deep dive into DomTrip's configuration options and customization capabilities.

- **Parser configuration** options
- **Serialization settings** customization
- **Whitespace handling** strategies
- **Error handling** configuration

### Plugin Architecture
Understanding DomTrip's extensible architecture.

- **Plugin interfaces** and implementations
- **Custom processors** development
- **Extension points** utilization
- **Third-party integrations**

## Best Practices

### Code Organization
Recommended patterns for organizing DomTrip-based code.

- **Service layer** patterns
- **Repository patterns** for XML data
- **Factory abstractions**
- **Testing strategies**

### Error Handling
Advanced error handling and recovery strategies.

- **Exception hierarchies** understanding
- **Recovery patterns** implementation
- **Validation strategies**
- **Debugging techniques**

## Version Compatibility

### Version Management
Managing DomTrip versions and compatibility considerations.

- **API evolution** understanding
- **Backward compatibility** strategies
- **Upgrade paths** planning
- **Deprecation handling**

## Getting Started with Advanced Topics

These advanced topics build upon the foundational concepts covered in:

- **[Getting Started Guide](../getting-started/)** - Basic concepts and usage
- **[Features Overview](../features/)** - Core feature descriptions
- **[API Reference](../api/)** - Complete API documentation

Each advanced topic includes detailed explanations, code examples, and real-world use cases to help you master DomTrip's more sophisticated capabilities.
